# Classes and Objects

In this lesson, you learn ■What classes and objects are ■How classes help you consolidate data with functions that work onthem ■About constructors, copy constructors, and the destructor ■What the move constructor is ■Object-oriented concepts of encapsulation and abstraction ■What the this pointer is about ■What a struct is and how it differs from class

## The Concept of Classes and Objects
Imagine you are writing a program that models a human being, like yourself. This human being needs to have an identity: a name, date of birth, place of birth, and  gender—information that makes him or her unique. Additionally, the human can per-form certain functions, such as talk and introduce him- or herself, among others. Thus, a human being can also be modeled as illustrated by Figure 9.1.

To model a human in a program, what you now need is a construct that enables you to group within it the attributes that define a human (data) and the activities a human can perform (functions) using the available attributes. This construct is the class.

## Declaring a Class

You declare a class using the keyword class followed by the name of the class, followed by a statement block {...} that encloses a set of member attributes and member functions within curly braces, and finally terminated by a semicolon ‘;’. A declaration of a class tells the compiler about the class and its properties. Declaration of a class alone does not make a difference to the execution of a program, as the class needs to be used just the same way as a function would need to be invoked.

Needless to say, IntroduceSelf() uses Talk() and some of the data attributes that are grouped within class Human. Thus, in keyword class, C++ has provided you with a powerful way to create your own data type that allows you to encapsulate attributes and functions that work using those. All attributes of a class, in this case name,  dateOfBirth, placeOfBirth, and gender, and all functions declared within it, namely Talk() and IntroduceSelf(), are called members of class Human.Encapsulation, which is the ability to logically group data and functions that work using it, is an important property of object-oriented programming.

You may often encounter the term method—these are essentially functions that are members of a class

## An Object as an Instance of a Class

A class is like a blueprint, and declaring a class alone has no effect on the execution of a program. The real-world avatar of a class at program execution time is an object. To use the features of a class, you typically create an instance of that class, called an object. You use that object to access its member methods and attributes.

Creating an object of type class Human is similar to creating an instance of another type, say double:double pi= 3.1415;  // a variable of type doubleHuman  firstMan;  // firstMan: an object of class Human Alternatively, you would dynamically create an instance of class Human using new as you would for another type, say an int:int* pointsToNum = new int;  // an integer allocated dynamically delete pointsToNum;  // de-allocating memory when done usingHuman* firstWoman = new Human(); // dynamically allocated Humandelete firstWoman;  // de-allocating memory 

## Accessing Members Using the Dot Operator (.)

An example of a human would be Adam, male, born in 1970 in Alabama. Instance firstMan is an object of class Human, an avatar of the class that exists in reality, that is at runtime:Human  firstMan;  // an instance i.e. object of HumanAs the class declaration demonstrates, firstMan has attributes such as dateOfBirththat can be accessed using the dot operator (.):firstMan.dateOfBirth = "1970";This is because attribute dateOfBirth belongs to class Human, being a part of its blueprint as seen in the class declaration. This attribute exists in reality—that is, at  runtime—only when an object has been instantiated. The dot operator (.) helps you access attributes of an object.Ditto for methods such as IntroduceSelf():firstMan.IntroduceSelf();If you have a pointer firstWoman to an instance of class Human, you can either use the pointer operator (->) to access members, as explained in the next section, or use the indirection operator (*) to reference the object following the dot operator.Human* firstWoman = new Human();(*firstWoman).IntroduceSelf();

## Accessing Members Using the Pointer Operator (->)

If an object has been instantiated on the free store using new or if you have a pointer to an object, then you use the pointer operator (->) to access the member attributes and functions:Human* firstWoman = new Human();firstWoman->dateOfBirth = "1970";firstWoman->IntroduceSelf();delete firstWoman;A compile-worthy form of class Human featuring a new keyword public is demon-strated by Listing 9.1.

This class contains two member variables, one of type string called name at Line 7 and another of type int called age at Line 8. It also contains a function (also called method) IntroduceSelf() at Lines 10–14. Lines 20 and 25 in main() instantiate two objects of class Human, named firstMan and firstWoman, respectively. The lines  following this instantiation of objects set the member variables of the objects firstMan and firstWoman using operator, which has been explained shortly before. Note how Lines 29 and 30 invoke the same function IntroduceSelf() on the two objects to create two distinct lines in the output. In a way this program demonstrates how objects firstManand firstWoman are unique and individually distinct real-world representatives of an abstract type defined by a class Human

## Keywords public and private

Information can be classified into at least two categories: data that we don’t mind the public knowing and data that is private. Gender, for most people, is an example of infor-mation that we may not mind sharing. However, income may be a private matter. C++ enables you to model class attributes and methods as public or private. Public class members can be used by anyone in possession of an object of the class. Private class

members can be used only within the class (or its “friends”). C++ keywords public and private help you as the designer of a class decide what parts of a class can be invoked from outside it, for instance, from main(), and what cannot.What advantages does this ability to mark attributes or methods as private present you as the programmer? Consider the declaration of class Human ignoring all but the member attribute age

Assume an instance of a Human called Eve:Human eve;When the user of this instance tries to access member age:cout << eve.age; // compile errorthen this user would get a compile error akin to “Error: Hu m a n::age—cannot access  private member declared in class Human.” The only permissible way to know the agewould be to ask for it via public method GetAge() supplied by class Human and  implemented in a way the programmer of the class thought was an appropriate way to expose the age:cout << eve.GetAge(); // OKIf the programmer of class Human so desires, he could use GetAge() to show Eve as younger than she is! In other words, this means C++ allows the class to control what attributes it wants to expose and how it wants to expose the same. If there were no 

GetAge() public member method implemented by class Human, the class would effec-tively have ensured that the user cannot query age at all. This feature can be useful in situations that are explained later in this lesson.Similarly, Hu m a n::age cannot be assigned directly either:eve.age = 22; // compile errorThe only permissible way to set the age is via method SetAge():eve.SetAge(22); // OKThis has many advantages. The current implementation of SetAge() does nothing but directly set the member variable Hu m a n::age. However, you can use SetAge() to verify the age being set is non-zero and not negative and thus validate external input:class Human{private:   int age;public:   void SetAge(int humansAge)   {if (humansAge > 0)age = humansAge;   }};Thus, C++ enables the designer of the class to control how data attributes of the class are accessed and manipulated.

## Abstraction of Data via Keyword private

While allowing you to design a class as a container that encapsulates data and  methods that operate on that data, C++ empowers you to decide what information remains unreachable to the outside world (that is, unavailable outside the class) via keyword private. At the same time, you have the possibility to allow controlled access to even information declared private via methods that you have declared as public. Thus your implementation of a class can abstract member information that classes and functions outside this class don’t need to have access to.Going back to the example related to Hu m a n::age being a private member, you know that even in reality many people don’t like to reveal their true age. If class Human was required to tell an age two years younger than the current age, it could do so easily via a public function GetAge() that uses the Hu m a n::age parameter, reduces it by two, and supplies the result as demonstrated by Listing 9.2.

Abstraction is an important concept in object-oriented languages. It empowers  programmers to decide what attributes of a class need to remain known only to the class and its members with nobody outside it (with the exception of those declared as its “friends”) having access to it.

## Constructors

A constructor is a special function (or method) invoked during the instantiation of a class to construct an object. Just like functions, constructors can also be overloaded.


## Declaring and Implementing a Constructor

A constructor is a special function that takes the name of the class and returns no value. So, class Human would have a constructor that is declared like this:class Human{public:   Human(); // declaration of a constructor};This constructor can be implemented either inline within the class or externally outside the class declaration. An implementation (also called definition) inside the class looks like this:class Human{public:   Human()   {// constructor code here   }};

A variant enabling you to define the constructor outside the class’ declaration looks like this:class Human{public:   Human(); // constructor declaration};// constructor implementation (definition)Human::Human(){   // constructor code here}

:: is called the scope resolution operator. For example, Human::dateOfBirth is referring to variable dateOfBirthdeclared within the scope of class Human. ::dateOfBirth, on the other hand would refer to another variable dateOfBirth in a global scope.

## When and How to Use Constructors

A constructor is always invoked during object creation, when an instance of a class is constructed. This makes a constructor a perfect place for you to initialize class  member variables such as integers, pointers, and so on to values you choose. Take a look at Listing 9.2 again. Note that if you had forgotten to SetAge(), the integer variable Hu m a n::age may contain an unknown value as that variable has not been initialized (try it by commenting out Lines 28 and 31). Listing 9.3 uses constructors to implement a  better version of class Human, where variable age has been initialized.

In the output you see a new line that indicates object construction. Now, take a look at main() defined in Lines 34–41. You see that the first line in output was the result of the creation (construction) of object firstWoman in Line 36. The constructor Human::Human() in Lines 11–15 contains the cout statement that contributes to this output. Note how the constructor initializes integer age to zero. Should you forget to SetAge() on a newly constructed object, you can rest assured that the constructor would have ensured that the value contained in variable age is not a random integer (that might look valid) but instead a zero.

A constructor that is invoked without arguments is called the default constructor. Programming a default constructor is optional.If you don’t program any constructor, as seen in Listing 9.1, the compiler creates one for you (that constructs member attributes but does not initialize Plain Old Data types such as int to any specific non-zero value).

## Overloading Constructors

Constructors can be overloaded just like functions. We can therefore write a constructor that requires Human to be instantiated with a name as a parameter, for example:class Human{public:   Human()   {// default constructor code here   }   Human(string humansName)   {// overloaded constructor code here   }};The application of overloaded constructors is demonstrated by Listing 9.4 in creating an object of class Human with a name supplied at the time of construction

main() in Lines 26–30 is minimalistic and creates two instances of class Human. firstMan uses the default constructor while firstWoman uses the overloaded  constructor supplying name and age at instantiation. The output is the result of object construction only! You may appreciate that if class Human had chosen to not support the default constructor, main() would’ve had no option but to construct every object of Human using the overloaded constructor that takes name and age as a prerequisite—making it impossible to create a Human without supplying a name or age.

You can choose to not implement the default constructor to enforce object instantiation with certain minimal parameters as explained in the next section.

.TIPClass Without a Default ConstructorIn Listing 9.5, see how class Human without the default constructor enforces the  creator to supply a name and age as a prerequisite to creating an object.

This version of class Human has only one constructor that takes a string and an intas input parameters, as seen in Line 11. There is no default constructor available, and given the presence of an overloaded constructor, the C++ compiler does not generate a default constructor for you. This sample also demonstrates the ability to create an object of class Human with name and age set at instantiation, and no possibility to change it afterward. This is because the name attribute of the Human is stored as a private vari-able. Hu m a n::n am e cannot be accessed or modified by main() or by any entity that is not a member of class Human. In other words, the user of class Human is forced by the overloaded constructor to specify a name (and age) for every object he creates and is not allowed to change that name. This models a real-world scenario quite well, don’t you think? You were named at birth; people are allowed to know your name, but nobody (except you) has the authority to change it

## Constructor Parameters with Default Values
Just the same way as functions can have parameters with default values specified, so can constructors. What you see in the following code is a slightly modified version of the constructor from Listing 9.5 at Line 11 where the age parameter has a default value of 25:

Note that a default constructor is one that can be instantiated without arguments, and not necessarily one that doesn’t take parameters. So, this constructor with two parameters, both with default values, is a default constructor:class Human{private:   string name;   int age;public:   // default values for both parameters   Human(string humansName = "Adam", int humansAge = 25)   {name = humansName;age = humansAge;cout << "Overloaded constructor creates ";cout << name << " of age " << age;   }};The reason is that class Human can still be instantiated  without arguments:Human adam; // Human takes default name "Adam", age 25

## Constructors with Initialization Lists

You have seen how useful constructors are in initializing member variables. Another way to initialize members is by using initialization lists. A variant of the constructor in Listing 9.5 using initialization lists would look like this:

Thus, the initialization list is characterized by a colon (:) following the parameter  declaration contained in parentheses (...), followed by an individual member  variable and the value it is initialized to. This initialization value can be a parameter such as humansName or can even be a fixed value. Initialization lists can also be useful in  invoking base class constructors with specific arguments. These are discussed again in Lesson 10, “Implementing Inheritance.”You can see a version of class Human that features a default constructor with  parameters, default values, and an initialization list in Listing 9.6

The constructor with initialization lists is seen in Lines 11–16, where you can also see that the parameters have been given default values "Adam" for name and 25 for age. Hence, when an instance of class Human called adam is created in Line 21, without arguments, its members are automatically assigned the default values. eve, on the other hand, has been supplied with arguments as shown in Line 22—these arguments become values that are assigned to Hu m a n::n am e and Hu m a n::age during construction.

It is possible to define a constructor as a constant expression too, using keyword constexpr. In special cases where such a construct would be useful from a performance point of view, you would use it at the constructor declaration

## Destructor
A destructor, like a constructor, is a special function, too. A constructor is invoked at object instantiation, and a destructor is automatically invoked when an object is destroyed.

## Declaring and Implementing a Destructor
The destructor looks like a function that takes the name of the class, yet has a tilde (~) preceding it. So, class Human would have a destructor that is declared like this:class Human{   ~Human(); // declaration of a destructor};This destructor can either be implemented inline in the class or externally outside the class declaration. An implementation or definition inside the class looks like this:class Human{public:   ~Human()   {// destructor code here   }};A variant enabling you to define the destructor outside the class’s declaration looks like this:class Human{public:   ~Human(); // destructor declaration};// destructor definition (implementation)Human::~Human(){   // destructor code here}As you can see, the declaration of the destructor differs from that of the  constructor slightly in that this contains a tilde (~). The role of the destructor is, however,  diametrically opposite to that of the constructor.

.When and How to Use a DestructorA destructor is always invoked when an object of a class is destroyed when it goes out of scope or is deleted via delete. This property makes a destructor the ideal place to reset variables and release dynamically allocated memory and other resources.

This book has recommended the usage of std::string over a char* buffer, so that you don’t need to worry about managing memory allocation and timely deallocation yourself. std::string and other such utilities are nothing but classes themselves that make use of constructors and the destructor (in addition to operators, which you study in Lesson 12, “Operator Types and Operator Overloading”) in taking away the work of allocation, deallocation, and memory management from you. Analyze a sample class MyString as shown in Listing 9.7 that allocates memory for a character string in the constructor and releases it in the destructor.

A destructor cannot be overloaded. A class can have only one destructor. If you forget to implement a destructor, the compiler creates and invokes a dummy destructor, that is, an empty one (that does no cleanup of dynamically allocated memory).

.NOTECopy ConstructorIn Lesson 7, “Organizing Code with Functions,” you learned that arguments passed to a function like Area() (shown in Listing 7.1) are copied:double Area(double radius);So, the argument sent as parameter radius is copied when Area() is invoked. This rule applies to objects, that is, instances of classes as well.

.Shallow Copying and Associated ProblemsClasses such as MyString, shown in Listing 9.7, contain a pointer member buffer that points to dynamically allocated memory, allocated in the constructor using new and deallocated in the destructor using delete[]. When an object of this class is copied, the pointer member is copied, but not the pointed memory, resulting in two objects  pointing to the same dynamically allocated buffer in memory. When an object is destructed, delete[] deallocates the memory, thereby invalidating the pointer copy held by the other object. Such copies are shallow and are a threat to the stability of the program, as Listing 9.8 demonstrates.

Why does class MyString that worked just fine in Listing 9.6 cause a crash in Listing 9.7? The only difference between Listing 9.6 and 9.7 is that the job of using the object sayHello of class MyString created in main() has been delegated to function UseMyString(), invoked in Line 44. Delegating work to this function has resulted in object sayHello in main() to be copied into parameter str used in UseMyString(). This is a copy generated by the compiler as the function has been declared to take str as a parameter by value and not by reference. The compiler performs a binary copy of Plain Old Data such as integers, characters, and pointers to the same. So the pointer value con-tained in sayHello.buffer has simply been copied to str—that is, sayHello.bufferpoints to the same memory location as str.buffer. This is illustrated in Figure 9.3

The binary copy did not perform a deep copy of the pointed memory location, and you now have two objects of class MyString pointing to the same location in memory. Thus, when the function UseMyString() ends, variable str goes out of scope and is destroyed. In doing so, the destructor of class MyString is invoked, and the destructor code in Line 22 in Listing 9.8 releases the memory allocated to buffer via delete[]. Note that this call to delete[] invalidates the memory being pointed to in copy say-Hello contained in main(). When main() ends, sayHello goes out of scope and is destroyed. This time, however, Line 22 repeats a call to delete on a memory address that is no longer valid (released and invalidated via the previous destruction of str). This double delete is what results in a crash.

.Ensuring Deep Copy Using a Copy ConstructorThe copy constructor is an overloaded constructor that you supply. It is invoked by the compiler every time an object of the class is copied.The declaration syntax of a copy constructor for class MyString is the following:class MyString{   MyString(const MyString& copySource); // copy constructor};MyString::MyString(const MyString& copySource){   // Copy constructor implementation code}Thus, a copy constructor takes an object of the same class by reference as a parameter. This parameter is an alias of the source object and is the handle you have in writing your custom copy code. You would use the copy constructor to ensure a deep copy of all buf-fers in the source, as Listing 9.9 demonstrates

Most of the code is similar to Listing 9.8 save a new copy constructor in Lines 23–38. To start with, let’s focus on main() that (as before) creates an object sayHello in Line 65. Creating sayHello results in the first line of output that comes from the  constructor of MyString, at Line 12. For sake of convenience, the constructor also displays the  memory address that buffer points to. main() then passes sayHello by value to  function UseMyString() in Line 66, which automatically results in the copy constructor being invoked as shown in the output. The code in the copy constructor is similar to that in the constructor. The basic idea is the same, check the length of C-style string  buffer contained in the copy source at Line 30, allocate proportional memory in one’s own instance of buffer, and then use strcpy to copy from source to destination at Line 33. This is not a shallow copy of pointer values. This is a deep copy where the content being pointed to is copied to a newly allocated buffer that belongs to this object, as illustrated in Figure 9.4

The output in Listing 9.9 indicates that the memory address being pointed to by  bufferis different in the copy—that is, two objects don’t point to the same dynamically  allocated memory address. As a result, when function UseMyString() returns and parameter str is destroyed, the destructor code does a delete[] on the memory address that was allocated in the copy constructor and belongs to this object. In doing so, it does not touch memory that is being pointed to by sayHello in main(). So, both functions end and their respective objects are destroyed successfully and peacefully without the application crashing.

The copy constructor has ensured deep copy in cases such as function calls:MyString sayHello("Hello from String Class");UseMyString(sayHello);However, what if you tried copying via assignment:MyString overwrite("who cares? ");overwrite = sayHello;This would still be a shallow copy because you still haven’t yet supplied a copy assignment operator=. In the absence of one, the compiler has supplied a default for you that does a shallow copy. The copy assignment operator is discussed in length in Lesson 12. Listing 12.8 is an improved MyString that implements thesame:MyString::operator= (const MyString& copySource){   //... copy assignment operator code}

Using const in the copy constructor declaration ensures that the copy constructor does not modify the source object being referred to.Additionally, the parameter in the copy constructor is passed by reference as a necessity. If this weren’t a reference, the copy constructor would itself invoke a copy, thus invoking itself again and so on till the system runs out of memory

.NOTEMove Constructors Help Improve PerformanceThere are cases where objects are subjected to copy steps automatically, due to the nature of the language and its needs. Consider the following:class MyString{   // pick implementation from Listing 9.9};MyString Copy(MyString& source) // function{   MyString copyForReturn(source.GetString());  // create copy   return copyForReturn;  // return by value invokes copy constructor

int main(){   MyString sayHello ("Hello World of C++");   MyString sayHelloAgain(Copy(sayHello)); // invokes 2x copy constructor   return 0;}As the comment indicates, in the instantiation of sayHelloAgain, the copy constructor was invoked twice, thus a deep copy was performed twice because of our call to function Copy(sayHello) that returns a MyString by value. However, this value returned is very temporary and is not available outside this expression. So, the copy constructor invoked in good faith by the C++ compiler is a burden on performance. This impact becomes sig-nificant if our class were to contain objects of great size.To avoid this performance bottleneck, versions of C++ starting with C++11 feature a move constructor in addition to a copy constructor. The syntax of a move constructor is// move constructorMyString(MyString&& moveSource){   if(moveSource.buffer != NULL)   {buffer = moveSource.buffer; // take ownership i.e. 'move'moveSource.buffer = NULL;   // set the move source to NULL   }}When a move constructor is programmed, the compiler automatically opts for the same for “moving” the temporary resource and hence avoiding a deep-copy step. With the move constructor implemented, the comment should be appropriately changed to the fol-lowing:MyString sayHelloAgain(Copy(sayHello)); // invokes 1x copy, 1x move constructorsThe move constructor is usually implemented with the move assignment operator, which is discussed in greater detail in Lesson 12. Listing 12.11 is a better version of class MyString that implements the move constructor and the move assignment operator.

## Different Uses of Constructors and the Destructor
You have learned a few important and basic concepts in this lesson, such as the concepts of constructors, destructor, and the abstraction of data and methods via keywords such as public and private. These concepts enable you to create classes that can control how they’re created, copied, destroyed, or expose data.Let’s look at a few interesting patterns that help you solve many important design prob-lems.

.Class That Does Not Permit Copying
You are asked to model the constitution of your country. Your constitution permits one president. Your class President risks the following:President ourPresident;DoSomething(ourPresident); // duplicate created in passing by valuePresident clone;clone = ourPresident; // duplicate via assignmentClearly, you need to avoid this situation. Beyond modeling a certain constitution, you might be programming an operating system and need to model one local area network, one processor, and so on. You need to ensure that certain resources cannot be copied or duplicated. If you don’t declare a copy constructor, the C++ compiler inserts a default public copy constructor for you. This ruins your design and threatens your implementa-tion. Yet, the language gives you a solution to this design paradigm.You would ensure that your class cannot be copied by declaring a private copy con-structor. This ensures that the function call DoSomething(ourPresident) will cause a compile failure. To avoid assignment, you declare a private assignment operator.Thus, the solution is the following:class President{private:   President(const President&); // private copy constructor   President& operator= (const President&); // private copy assignment operator   // ... other attributes};There is no need for implementation of the private copy constructor or assignment  operator. Just declaring them as private is adequate and sufficient toward fulfilling your goal of ensuring non-copyable objects of class President

9Singleton Class That Permits a Single Instanceclass President discussed earlier is good, but it has a shortcoming: It cannot help creation of multiple presidents via instantiation of multiple objects:President One, Two, Three;Individually they are non-copyable thanks to the private copy constructors, but what you ideally need is a class President that has one, and only one, real-world  manifestation—that is, there is only one object and creation of additional ones is  prohibited. Welcome to the concept of singleton that uses private constructors, a  private  assignment operator, and a static instance member to create this (controversially)  powerful  pattern

When the keyword static is used on a class’s data member, it ensures that the member is shared across all instances.When static is used on a local variable declared within the scope of a function, it ensures that the variable retains its value between function calls.When static is used on a member function—a method—the method is shared across all instances of the class.

Use the singleton pattern only where absolutely necessary, keeping future growth of the application and its features in per-spective. Note that the very feature that it restricts creation of multiple instances can become an architectural bottleneck when a use case comes up that needs multiple instances of the class.For example, if our project were to change from modeling a nation to modeling the United Nations, which is currently represented by 193 member nations, each with its own president, clearly we would have an architectural problem given a singleton class President that would permit the existence of only one instance


.CAUTIONClass That Prohibits Instantiation on the StackSpace on the stack is often limited. If you are writing a database that may contain tera-bytes of data in its internal structures, you might want to ensure that a client of this class cannot instantiate it on the stack; instead it is forced to create instances only on the free store. The key to ensuring this is declaring the destructor private:

Declaring a private destructor ensures that one is not allowed to create an instance 

This instance, if successfully constructed, would be on the stack. All objects on the stack get popped when the stack is unwound and therefore the compiler would need to compile and invoke the destructor ~MonsterDB() at the end of main(). However, this destructor is private and therefore inaccessible, resulting in a compile failure.A private destructor would not stop you from instantiating on the heap

If you see a memory leak there, you are not mistaken. As the destructor is not accessible from main, you cannot do a delete, either. What class MonsterDB needs to support is a publicstatic member function that would destroy the instance (a class member would have access to the private destructor

.Using Constructors to Convert TypesEarlier in this lesson, you learned that constructors can be overloaded, that is, they may take one or more parameters. This feature is often used to convert one type to another. Let’s consider a class Human that features an overloaded constructor that accepts an integer

Such converting constructors allow implicit conversions:Human anotherKid = 11; // int converted to HumanDoSomething(10); // 10 converted to Human!We declared DoSomething(Human person) as a function that accepts a parameter of type Human and does not accept an int! So, why did that line work? The compiler knows that class Human supports a constructor that accepts an integer and per-formed an implicit conversion for you—it created an object of type Human using the integer you supplied and sent it as an argu-ment to the function.To avoid implicit conversions, use keyword explicit at the time of declaring the constructor:class Human{   int age;public:   explicit Human(int humansAge): age(humansAge) {}};Using explicit is not a prerequisite but in many cases a good programming practice. The following sample in Listing 9.12 dem-onstrates a version of class Human that does not permit implicit conversions

Use Keyword explicit to Block Unintentional Implicit Conversions

The problem of implicit conversions and avoiding them using keyword explicit applies to operators too. Remember to note the usage of explicit when programming conversion operators introduced to you in Lesson 12

sthis PointerAn important concept in C++, this is a reserved keyword applicable within the scope of a class and contains the address of the object. In other words, the value of this is &object. Within a class member method, when you invoke another member method, the compiler sends this pointer as an implicit, invisible parameter in the function call

What you see here is the method IntroduceSelf() using private member Talk()to print a statement on the screen. In reality, the compiler embeds the this pointer in  calling Talk, that is invoked as Talk(this, "Bla bla").From a programming perspective, this does not have too many applications, except those where it is usually optional. For instance, the code to access age within SetAge(), as shown in Listing 9.2, can have a variant:

Note that the this pointer is not sent to class methods declared as static as static functions are not connected to an instance of the class. Instead they are shared by all instances.To use an instance variable in a static function, you would explic-itly declare a parameter and send this pointer as an argument

.How struct Differs from classstruct is a keyword from the days of C, and for all practical purposes it is treated by a C++ compiler similarly to a class. The exceptions are applicable to the access specifiers (public and private) when the programmer has not specified any. Unless specified, members in a struct are public by default (private for a class), and unless speci-fied, a struct features public inheritance from a base struct (private for a class). Inheritance is discussed in detail in Lesson 10. As you can see, a struct Human is similar to class Human, and instantiation of an object of type struct would be similar to type class as well

nDeclaring a friend of a classA class does not permit external access to its data members and methods that are declared private. This rule is waived for classes and functions that are disclosed as friend classes or functions, using keyword friend as seen in Listing 9.14

Line 7 contains the declaration that indicates to the compiler that function DisplayAge() in global scope is a friend and therefore is permitted special access to the private members of class Human. You can comment out Line 7 to see a compile failure at Line 22.Like functions, external classes can also be designated as a trusted friend, as Listing 9.15 demonstrates.

.union: A Special Data Storage Mechanism A union is a special class type where only one of the non-static data members is active at a time. Thus, a union can accommodate multiple data members, just like a class can, with the exception that only one of them can actually be used.

.Declaring a UnionA union is declared using keyword union, followed by the name of the union and its data members within braces:union UnionName{   Type1 member1;   Type2 member2;...   TypeN memberN;};

Similar to the struct, the members of a union are public by default. Unlike a struct, however, unions cannot be used in inheritance hierarchies. Additionally, the sizeof() a union is always fixed as the size of the largest member contained in the union—even if that mem-ber were inactive in an instance of the union.

.NOTEWhere Would You Use a union?Often a union is used as a member of a struct to model a complex data type. In some implementations, the ability of a union to interpret the fixed memory space as another type is used for type conversions or memory reinterpretation—a practice that is contro-versial and not necessary given alternatives.

The sample demonstrates that sizeof() the union objects u1 and u2 returns the same amount of memory reserved for both objects, notwithstanding the fact that u1 is used to hold an integer and u2 a char, char being smaller than an int. This is because the compiler reserves the amount of memory for a union that is consumed by the largest object it contains. Struct ComplexType defined in Lines 9–25, actually contains an enu-meration DataType that is used to indicate the nature of the object stored in the union, in addition to the data member, which is a union called Value. This combination of a struct comprising an enumeration used to hold type information and a union used to hold value is a popular application of the union. For example, the structure VARIANTpopularly used in Windows application programming follows a similar approach. This combination is used by function DisplayComplexType() defined in Lines 27–39 that uses the enumeration in executing the right case in the supplied switch-case construct. For an example, we have included a constructor and destructor in this union—these are optional in Listing 9.16 given that the union contains Plain-Old-Data types, but may be required if the union comprises another user-defined type such as a class or a struct

”TIPUsing Aggregate Initialization on Classes and StructsThe following initialization syntax is called an aggregate initialization syntax:Type objectName = {argument1, ..., argumentN};Alternatively, since C++11:Type objectName {argument1, ..., argumentN};Aggregate initialization can be applied to an aggregate, and therefore it is important to understand what data types fall under this category.You already saw examples of aggregate initialization in the initialization of arrays in Lesson 4, “Managing Arrays and Strings.” int myNums[] = { 9, 5, -1 }; // myNums is int[3]char hello[6] = { 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', ' \0' };

The term aggregate, however, is not limited to arrays of simple types like integers or characters, but extends also to classes (and therefore structs and unions) too. There are restrictions imposed by the standard on the specification of a struct or a class that can be called an aggregate. These restrictions get nuanced depending on the version of C++ standard that you refer to. Yet, it can be safely said that classes/structs that com-prise public and non-static data members, contain no private or protected data members, contain no virtual member functions, feature none or only public inheritance (that is, no private, protected, or virtual inheritance), and no user-defined constructors are aggregates too and can be initialized as one

Aggregate initialization will initialize only the first non-static member of a union. The aggregate initialization of the unions declared in Listing 9.16 would be43:    SimpleUnion u1{ 2100 }, u2{ 'C' };// In u2, member num (int) is initialized to ‘C’ (ASCII 67)// Although, you wished to initialize member alphabet (char)Therefore, for sake of clarity, it may be a good idea to not use aggregate initialization syntax on union, but the one used in Listing 9.16.